BCCI the CIA and foreign intelligence
introduction the relationships involving
BCCI
the CIA and members of the United States
and foreign intelligence communities
have been among the most perplexing
aspects of understanding the rise and
fall of BCCI the CIA's and BCCI's mutual
environments of secrecy have been one
obvious obstacle for many months
the CIA resisted providing information
to the subcommittee about its
involvement with and knowledge of BCCI
moreover key players who might explain
these relationships are unavailable some
including former CIA director William
Casey and BCCI customers and Iranian
arms dealers Ben Banerjee and Cyrus
Hashimi are dead others including most
of BCCI's key insiders remain held
incommunicado in Abu Dhabi while
promising in public hearings to provide
full cooperation to the subcommittee to
date the Abu Dhabi government has
refused to make any BCCI officers
available for interview by the
subcommittee former BCCI chairman I got
Hasan OBD remains severely incapacitated
due to a heart attack
finally some persons in a position to
know portions of the truth have denied
having any memory of events in which
they participated and of documents which
they reviewed a baseline for assessing
the BCCI CIA story is the CIA's official
record of its use of BCCI
and its targeting of the bank as set
forth in several hundred CIA records
created from 1982 through 1992 that
record was by and large accurately
represented by CIA acting director
Richard Kerr and public testimony on
October 25th 1991 supplemented by more
detailed classified testimony on October
31st 1991
unfortunately that record also contains
ostensible gaps in knowledge on the part
of the CIA about the activities of key
contacts in the Middle East for US
intelligence including BCCI shareholders
Kamal Adham and Abdul Rauf Khalil and
BCCI customer and iran-contra arms
merchant Adnan Khashoggi which strained
belief outside the documentary record
provided to the subcommittee by the CIA
there is additional material consisting
of BCCI documents testimony from BCCI
officials and insiders and extrinsic
circumstantial and historic information
describing other substantial contacts
between BCCI and the intelligence
community
these include contacts between BCCI and
former US intelligence officials
including a former head of the CIA
former and current foreign intelligence
officials and individuals engaged in
covert operations on behalf of the
United States government including in
the iran-contra affair in addition the
subcommittee has received allegations of
meetings between former CIA director
William Casey and BCCI's head I got
Hasan a bTW CIA officials have told the
subcommittee that the CIA as an
institution has rules requiring the
creation of written records on every
activity engaged in by the agency and on
all significant information reported to
the agency in the summer of 1991 the CIA
engaged in what its officials described
as a dumb or brute-force review of its
documents essentially reviewing all
possible files for information on BCCI
rather than relying on knowledgeable
individuals to select such information
the review located a substantial amount
of material generated by the CIA
throughout the 1980s which was produced
in July and August 1991 for CIA internal
reviews in September and October for the
congressional intelligence oversight
and beginning in March 1992 to the
subcommittee
unfortunately there remains a wide
disparity between the CIA's official
account of critical relationships
between BCCI and persons associated with
the CIA and the information available
from other sources including BCCI's own
records one is left with the choice of
accepting the official record which
requires an assessment that the other
contacts between BCCI and US
intelligence figures and operations are
coincidental
or of assuming that the full story of
BCCI's relationship to the United States
has been intentionally veiled by
critical players on both sides of that
relationship the subcommittee
investigation and the CIA the
subcommittee's contact with the CIA
regarding BCCI
began in March 1991 when staff learned
from a subcommittee source that the CIA
had prepared a report concerning BCCI's
criminality which was made available to
customs in late 1988 cleared staff
contacted the CIA's congressional
liaison office to request a copy of the
document the staff was told that no such
document had ever existed perplexed
staff contacted its source to determine
whether he was certain that the material
had been provided the source referred
staff to former customs Commissioner
William von Raab who confirmed the
existence of the document staff
contacted the CIA a second time and
informed the agency that a senior Reagan
administration official had viewed the
document again the subcommittee was told
that no documents concerning BCCI had
ever been created by the CIA staff then
met with von Raab who revealed that not
only had the CIA provided him with a
briefing paper regarding BCCI
but that he obtained it through the
offices of then CIA Assistant Director
Robert Gates who referred to BCCI as
quote the bank of crook
sent criminals end quote bond Rob also
advised the subcommittee that customs
agents handling the see chase
investigation of BCC I had discovered in
the course of their work several BCCI
accounts that were actually accounts
held by the CIA bond Rob told
subcommittee staff that his agents were
told to cease their investigation of
those particular accounts however in an
interview with subcommittee staff AUSA
Mark Jeske denied that he had ever
uncovered any CIA involvement with the
bank and assistant attorney general
robert muller testified that at no time
has anyone from the CIA attempted to
obstruct or interfere with the
Department of Justice's investigation
and prosecution of BCCI on May 14 1991
Senator Kerry wrote CIA director Webster
to again request the briefing paper on
BCC I prepared by the CIA as well as
information on the CIA's own use of the
bank no reply was received in response
to this letter from the CIA for over two
months during which BCC I was closed
globally following its seizure in the
United Kingdom by the Bank of England on
July 5th 1991 in the meantime cleared
staff requested a formal briefing from
CIA staff concerning the CIA's knowledge
of BCCI's activities the CIA provided an
oral briefing at its offices in June
1991 at the secret level consisting of
very general information concerning bcc
i--'s used by drug traffickers material
which was by then already largely a
matter of public record the briefer
provided by the CIA to congressional
staff was unfamiliar with other basic
information about BCCI such as the names
of bcc i--'s shareholders including
former Saudi intelligence chief Kamal
Adham the key figure in BCCI's secret
takeover of first American and the CIA's
former principal contact in
the Arab Middle East further the briefer
also appeared to be ignorant of the
principle analytic documents concerning
BCCI previously prepared by the CIA and
disseminated to executive branch
agencies which contained this and other
more important information about BCCI on
July 23rd 1991 CIA director Webster
replied to Senator Kerry's May 14th
request by letter admitting to the
existence of two documents concerning
BCCI which were described as extremely
sensitive and therefore restricted to
being held by the Senate Intelligence
Committee on reviewing these memoranda
Senator Kerry recognized that the
earlier of the two documents created in
early 1986 contained startling
information that the first American Bank
in Washington was secretly owned by BCCI
the distribution list attached to the
memorandum indicated that the CIA had
communicated this information at the
time to the Treasury Department there
was no indication that either Treasury
or the CIA had ever advised the Federal
Reserve the primary regulator of first
American of this critical information
Senator Kerry asked judge Webster to
declassify immediately the fact that the
CIA had known as of 1986 that BCCI owned
first American and to begin the process
of declassifying in the entirety of both
memoranda on July 31st 1991 the CIA
advised senator Kerry that he could
reveal the information concerning BCCI's
secret ownership of first American but
no other information from the memos the
CIA had not yet acknowledged its own use
of BCCI to the subcommittee or provided
access to any other materials prepared
by the CIA concerning BCCI
when the single sentence from the 1986
memorandum was Declassified Senator
Kerry supplied it immediately to the Fed
Reserve whose counsel expressed shock
that the CIA Treasury State Department
and Office of the Comptroller of the
currency had possessed this information
in 1986 and never provided it to the
Federal Reserve on august 2nd 1991 with
Congress in recess acting CIA director
Richard Kerr chose to provide the first
public account of the CIA's involvement
with BCCI at the National Press Club to
a group of high school students who were
not permitted to ask questions during
the August recess the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence began its
audit of the CIA's relationship with
BCCI and requested that the CIA provide
its auditors with all documents prepared
by the CIA concerning BCCI in the same
period the CIA began its own internal
reviews of its handling of BCCI
including a management review an
intelligence review and an independent
investigation by the CIA's statutory
inspector general by the end of August
1991 the CIA had determined that there
were several hundred reports on BCCI by
the CIA of which perhaps four dozen
contained substantial information
regarding the bank through early October
1991 in response to further requests
from Senator Kerry the CIA continued to
refuse to declassify any of the
remainder of the information concerning
BCCI on the ground that to do so might
impair all sources and methods the CIA
also remained unwilling to permit staff
outside the intelligence committees to
review this material as CIA legal staff
later explained it the CIA was
unaccustomed to providing information
pertaining to oversight issues to staff
outside the intelligence committees and
felt uncomfortable with the questions
being posed by the subcommittee
ultimately acting director Richard Kerr
agreed to testify
before the subcommittee concerning BCCI
in public after senator Kerry advised
the CIA that the nomination of CIA
director Robert Gates would be delayed
until the CIA provided such testimony on
October 25th 1991 acting director kurt
testified an open session before the
subcommittee regarding the CIA BCCI
relationship expressing from his opening
statement
his personal discomfort about providing
information concerning intelligence
matters in public quote as an
intelligence officer for 30 years I find
myself a little reluctant in an open
hearing to talk about intelligence
intelligence sources and intelligence
methods and the information that we
acquire through that process end quote
despite kurz reluctance the information
contained in his testimony summarized
below substantially advanced the
subcommittee's knowledge of the official
record regarding the CIA's contacts with
BCCI for example the subcommittee
learned for the first time that there
were not two memoranda regarding BCCI
prepared by the CIA but hundreds which
had been disseminated to other agencies
Kerr also disclosed that he had provided
the Treasury Department with information
about BCCI's secret ownership of first
American in 1985 a year earlier than
previously known and implying the
existence of a separate memorandum to
Treasury not previously acknowledged her
refused to answer a number of questions
in open session and closed session the
following week Couric knowledged that
several of the questions he refused to
answer did not refer to classified
information or concern national security
instead he had refused to discuss the
information in open session because he
felt uncomfortable discussing
information in public that might
embarrass the United States or any US
agency or official initially Kerr
resisted providing the senators serving
on the subcommittee
the opportunity to review the
documentary material pertaining to BCC I
created by the CIA suggesting instead
that the CIA provide the Senators only
general information characterizing the
number of reports and the general
substance to quote protect sources and
methods end quote
following the closed session during
which Senator Kerry pressed again for
the documents it was agreed between the
subcommittee and the CIA that all the
memoranda prepared by the CIA concerning
BCCI would be sent to the Senate
Intelligence Committee storage facility
to permit review months later that
material had still not been provided
finally on February 18 1992 some 11
months after the subcommittee had first
sought information concerning BCCI from
the CIA director gates after meeting
with Senator Kerry directed the CIA to
permit staff to review additional
records at the CIA
pertaining to BCCI following this
directive from gates the CIA for the
first time made substantial information
regarding its knowledge of BCCI
available to the subcommittee although
information on CIA operations using the
bank remained unavailable channeled
solely to the congressional intelligence
committees the subcommittee review
culminated in the CIA agreeing to
declassify certain material from the
1985 memorandum about BCCI discussed
below the official record the CIA's
first user request in connection with
BCCI was from the Federal Reserve in
1981 which asked the CIA whether the CIA
had any derogatory information
concerning the Middle Eastern
shareholders who were about to buy
financial general Bancshares FGB which
later became first american bank chairs
through the holding company CCA h the
CIA after reviewing its records told the
Federal Reserve that it had no
derogatory information on the
shareholders
which included kamal adham who included
kamal adham
and abdul rauf Khalil the past and then
current Saudi intelligence liaisons to
the United States the CIA did not tell
the Federal Reserve that Adam and Khalil
were foreign intelligence liaisons of
the United States nor did it advise the
Federal Reserve that both Adam and a
third FGB shareholder Faisal Alfa ye had
been the subject of a Securities and
Exchange Commission probe in connection
with violations of the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act by Boeing and Lockheed for
arms sales to Saudi Arabia there is
conflicting evidence as to whether the
governors of the Federal Reserve are
aware of the intelligence background of
any of the CCA H shareholders however at
the staff level at least the Federal
Reserve did learn in 1981 of both the
intelligence contacts of Adam and the
SEC probe into his and Falaise alleged
receipt of bribes former Federal Reserve
Chairman Paul Volcker who signed the
order approving the application of CCA
eight shareholders to take over
financial bank shares testified before
the Senate Banking Committee in early
1991 that he wasn't aware of mr. Adams
intelligence background and that quote
he was sure that it might send an
eyebrow or two up and quote and that
quote it might provoke further
investigation end quote
because BCCI was not officially
purchasing FGB and a condition of the
purchase was that BCCI and not be
involved in the transaction except as an
investment advisor the Federal Reserve
did not ask the CIA about BCCI itself if
it had done so it would likely have
learned about BCCI's involvement in
money laundering according to the
contemporaneous CIA records retrieved
during the search of agency files during
the summer of 1991 the CIA first
developed information concerning BCCI
which it provided users
in the US government in 1979 after
learning in the early 1980s that BCCI
was as an institution involved in money
laundering activities the CIA began by
the mid-1980s to target BCCI as an
institution for foreign intelligence
collection initially this collection
operation was small the CIA began a
larger and more comprehensive operation
as of 1986 which continued through 1990
this operation focused on the quote
people the mechanisms and the way that
BCCI laundered narcotics money end quote
in the course of targeting BCCI for
laundering drug money
the CIA learned of BCCI's involvement in
manipulating certain financial markets
in arms trafficking and in supporting
international terrorism including
handling the finances of Sabri al banna
or Abu Nidal and his terrorist
organization between 1979 and 1991 the
Directorate of operations of the CIA
produced several hundred reports
containing intelligence concerning BCCI
BCCI was also discussed in a number of
finished Directorate of intelligence
analytic studies as part of larger
discussions of terrorism and counter
narcotics among these reports was
detailed reporting on the use of BCCI
Panama by major narcotics traffickers
the operations director had also
prepared three special analytic reports
and correctly characterized by kerr as
having been prepared by the CIA's
intelligence directorate one each in
1985 1986 and 1989 discussed below in
some detail kerr acknowledged that the
CIA had also used BCCI for certain
intelligence gathering operations and
characterised the use as limited and
routine and undertaken without the
knowledge of any person at BCCI a Senate
Intelligence Committee
conducted in the summer and fall of 1991
confirmed kurz testimony on that point
according to a briefing provided by the
auditor to subcommittee staff the
subcommittee was not permitted by the
CIA to read the actual report generated
by Senate Intelligence Committee staff
and thus detailed review by the
subcommittee of that audit has not been
possible Kerr also acknowledged what the
subcommittee had learned in testimony
just one day previously from former
first American president Robert Altman
that the CIA had made extensive use of
first American for a variety of purposes
including as a repository for normal
banking and for savings accounts the
agency later informed subcommittee staff
that neither Clifford nor Altman had
been made aware of the existence of the
accounts prior to the summer of 1991
according to Kerr critical to
understanding the contacts between the
CIA and BCCI
were a number of things the CIA did not
do Kerr testified that contrary to press
reports the CIA had not been involved
with any BCCI black network of thugs and
assassins had not been involved with or
had knowledge of any use of BCCI for the
sale of arms to Iran or the diversion of
funds for the Nicaraguan Contras had not
violated any laws had no relationship
with BCCI's head Agha Hassan OBT
and had never placed a BD on a watch
list
the 1985 1986 and 1989 reports the
operations directorate produced two
finished analytic reports regarding BCCI
the first in early 1986 and the second
in early 1989 as well as a special
intelligence report in early 1985 which
was the basis of the material provided
to the Treasury and to OCC Kerr
testified that as of early 1985 the CIA
had learned that BCCI had succeed
and gaining control of financial general
Bancshares
in late 1981 which then was renamed
first American and told the Treasury and
Office of the Comptroller of the
currency OCC about BCCI's secret
purchase Kurt did not inform the
subcommittee that the original report
containing this information was then
lost and has never since been located by
the CIA congressional relations at the
agency did inform subcommittee staff
that the author of the 1985 report could
not be identified however in a
subsequent meeting the Associate
Director of Operations informed
subcommittee staff that indeed the
author had been identified and that he
had been asked to reconstruct the memo
to the extent possible the 1985 report
there are a number of oddities
pertaining to the early 1985 report by
the CIA on BCCI
the first oddity is the fact that the
original report is missing and has not
been located by the CIA which has
instead at the request of the
subcommittee reconstructed the contents
of the report by looking to the source
information it was based upon and
relying on its normal procedures for
analyzing and disseminating similar
material the second unusual aspect of
the report is that the CIA has records
showing it to have been commissioned by
the then head of the international
division of the OCC Robert Bench who has
denied under oath having ever sought the
information a third oddity is that CIA
records also showed Douglas P Mulholland
then the intelligence chief of the
Treasury Department as having also
solicited the information yet like bench
Mulholland denies having any
recollection of having done so forth the
information contained in the report that
BCCI owned first american was important
and startling and would have been so
recognized by anyone in the position of
Mulholland or [ __ ] yet neither of them
recollect that the report discussed this
issue first American was by then the
largest bank holding company in the
metropolitan Washington area and BCCI's
prohibition from ownership had received
widespread attention in the Washington
Post and the financial press v no action
was taken by Mulholland or bench in
response to this critical information to
alert federal law enforcement or the
Federal Reserve the primary regulator
the CIA having provided the information
to Treasury and the OCC believed it had
no further obligation to disseminate the
information either in an effort to sort
through these anomalies the subcommittee
in the spring of 1992 reviewed the
material provided by the CIA to
Mulholland and bench in 1985 during the
course of that review the CIA provided a
complete record to the subcommittee of
all the raw information upon which the
1985 memo was based the subcommittee
requested the declassification of
material from the 1985 material
concerning first American and the
bribery of officials the
declassification was completed on April
9th 1991 and consisted of the following
account which excerpts the substance and
on critical factual issues the actual
language of the original 1985 material
the CIA's summary background in the
early 1980s as part of the overall US
government effort to stop international
narcotics trafficking the agency began
collecting strategic foreign
intelligence on narco dollar
money-laundering a successful
intelligence collection operation in the
Caribbean developed operational leads to
several major foreign banks including
BCCI suspected of narcotics
money-laundering pursuing these leads
CIA initiated a mutually productive
dialogue with international banking
experts at the Office of the Comptroller
of the currency to determine how CIA
could meet a
CiCi's intelligence needs in late 1984
agency officers met with a senior
official from OCC who expressed interest
in a broad range of international
financial intelligence CIA could provide
one of several issues in which the OCC
official expressed interest was the
takeover efforts and suspicious
activities of institutions such as BCCI
which he specifically cited for its
spectacular growth and the mystery
surrounding its activities in a later
meeting a Treasury intelligence liaison
official expressed the interest of that
organization in BCCI because of a
possible concern about the less than
wholesome reputation of the bank for an
intelligence collection in late 1984 and
early 1985 the agency collected some
intelligence on BCCI and disseminated
the information to the Treasury
Department the foreign intelligence
provided to the Treasury dealt with
several activities including the
following information the primary goal
of BCCI senior management was growth in
deposits at all branches internationally
the strategy being employed by BCCI to
achieve rapid growth in assets and
profits included manipulation of
international financial markets and
bribery which was an approved policy
encouraged by senior executives
including the general managers and
president Abd the objectives of BCCI
included developing both profits and
political economic leverage in the near
East Africa and Asia through the use of
a tremendous volume of financial assets
BCCI expansion in the United States
included the secret ownership of the
Washington dc-based bank holding company
with which BCCI was affiliated all of
the shareholders in the Washington
dc-based Bank Holding Company were
fronts for BCCI BCCI loaned them the
capital to make the purchase in return
for their shares as collateral which was
regarded as a sensitive secret within
BCCI management's
circles if all of BCCI's assets in the
US were included in their balance sheet
the bank would be much higher in the
worldwide ranking of the top 100
financial institutions the agency
Treasury dialogue CIA provided this
foreign intelligence to the Treasury
intelligence community liaison
representative in January 1985 Douglas P
Moe Holland who reported to CIA that he
carried it directly to the secretary
Donald Regan for his further disposition
the Treasury intelligence liaison
officer also recommended only to persons
in the Comptroller hierarchy see this
material which he described as dynamite
the liaison officer praised this
information promised to keep the agency
fully informed of Treasury's reaction to
it and provided follow-up collection
requirements to the agency these
included a request for examples of BCCI
management encouraging the use of
bribery the Treasury liaison officer
also requested the name of the
Washington dc-based bank holding company
owned by BCCI and the names of any other
us-based companies controlled by BCCI
in April 1985 agency officers had a
curiously unsatisfactory discussion with
the Treasury intelligence liaison
representative concerning BCCI
activities reported earlier by the
agency the Treasury official explained
that the position of the Treasury
enforcement offices was that the BCCI
activities reported by the agency were
not surprising and complemented the
general picture Treasury had of BCCI the
Treasury Officer stated that although
his organization was interested in
BCCI's activities to manipulate an
international financial market and in
the bank's buying into the u.s. along
the lines of its acquisition of
financial general Bancshares first
American Treasury was not concerned
enough to levy further collection
requirements on the agency the Treasury
intelligence liaison officer said that
money-laundering
remained the major focus
of Treasury's enforcement side what is
notable about the information contained
in the memorandum is that it was
emphatic on BCCI's ownership of a
Washington dc-based holding company
identified by Treasury as first American
the Treasury's senior intelligence
official Mulholland initially considered
the information to be dynamite but by
April after conferring with then
Secretary of the Treasury Donald Regan
had concluded that Treasury saw no need
for receiving further information about
BCCI's ownership of first American or
its plans in the United States generally
Mulholland's testimony on February 19th
1992 Douglas P Mulholland currently the
Assistant Secretary of State for
intelligence and research testified
about his contacts with the CIA
concerning BCCI as the special assistant
for national security to the secretary
of the Treasury from 1982 through 1987
when he was the CIA's chief liaison in
the Treasury mulholland a career officer
of the CIA had been placed in Treasury
by CIA chief William Casey and left his
job at Treasury on retirement from the
CIA in 1987 to become a researcher for
the Bush election campaign before being
appointed to his current position as
head of intelligence at the State
Department
Mulholland described his contacts with
the CIA
concerning BCCI as follows quote I have
a very limited memory of any specific
documents discussions or events relating
to BCCI including any information that
may have been introduced by the
intelligence community during the
mid-1980s although I may well have
discussed sensitive information on BCCI
with senior department officials
including then secretary Donald Regan
that was not such an unusual experience
as to ingrain such a discussion in my
mind with regard to BCCI I recall only
receiving one
port during my time at the Treasury the
report was hand carried to me by a CIA
officer who emphasized the sensitivity
of the report I also recall this report
because of its unusual format the report
lacked any heading or identifying
numbers and was typed on a plain piece
of paper one substantive aspect of the
report struck me as particularly
surprising but because this information
was produced and remains controlled by
CIA I am unable to discuss with you
today
any of the substance and quote in public
testimony Mulholland therefore declined
to discuss the substance of the single
aspect of the report which he found
surprising however in interviews with
subcommittee staff prior to his
testimony
Mulholland advised the subcommittee that
his memory concerned a matter in the CIA
report that had nothing to do with
BCCI's possible ownership of US
institutions and that he had no personal
memory that the issue was raised in the
report
Mulholland emphasized throughout his
testimony that his own memory regarding
the BCCI report was very limited he
acknowledged that the CIA's documents
reported him having provided the report
to secretary Regan but he stated he had
no personal memory of having done so he
estimated the frequency of his meetings
with secretary Regan regarding CIA
reports as being anywhere from quote
zero to 100 percent and quote of the
time and said he had not the quote
vaguest idea
end quote of how often he had discussed
such matters with the secretary he
testified that the secondary source
chronology of the CIA concerning his
activities was plausible but that he
could not say for certain whether it was
correct as he had no memory of having
asked for any information or having
briefed anyone else on the information
Mulholland stated that even if he had
recognized that the information
contained in the report was important he
would not have the right
at the Treasury Department let alone the
responsibility to take any action to
disseminate the information further
since the CIA was the agency which
created the information and controlled
it
Mulholland acknowledged that he had
never received a comparable report from
the CIA about any other Bank
besides BCCI and that the BCCI report
was not normal he testified that there
was no record maintained at the Treasury
Department of the report having been
logged in and he could not give any
reason for this omission Mulholland said
he had no memory of having commissioned
such a report despite the CIA's
documentary record that he had done so
and hence he was unable to provide the
subcommittee with any reason why any
person at Treasury might have asked the
CIA to develop information concerning
BCCI
in late 1984 and early 1985 bench's
testimony bench like Mulholland had only
a very limited memory of the 1985 report
as he testified quote I do recall
reviewing a classified piece of
information that dealt with BCCI it was
somewhere in the middle of the 82 to 87
period I feel comfortable about that I
recall receiving a document from the CIA
that dealt with BCCI
to the best of my recollection it didn't
deal with first American and it didn't
deal with anything in the United States
there is an action step that I took
within the office on that information
which was to look at this information in
terms of LCD lesser developed country
debt end quote
in staff interviews prior to this
testimony bench emphasized that he had
no memory whatsoever of having ever been
advised that BCCI held interests in any
financial institution in the United
States let alone first American Bench
also told staff that not only had he no
memory of having commissioned a report
on BCCI
but he would have been unlikely to have
done so
any case because of the OCC's need to
work abroad without officials from other
countries being concerned that it was
doing so in conjunction with US
intelligence bench was therefore
perplexed that the CIA had identified
him as the requester noting that to the
extent he had an interaction concerning
BCCI
it was the CIA asking him if he wanted
information
Regan's recollection following the
declassification of the 1985 memorandum
by the CIA the subcommittee contacted
former secretary of the Treasury Donald
Regan to determine what memory he had
regarding mulholland having provided him
with the 1985 memorandum according to an
aide to Regan he initially believed he
had not been shown the memorandum by
mulholland because he had left Treasury
to take the position of chief of staff
at the White House and so advised a Wall
Street Journal reporter who contacted
him at home in August 1991 Regan was
then contacted by Mulholland in August
or September 1991 who advised Regan that
Mulholland had reviewed records at the
CIA showing that he did provide the
memorandum to Regan and that MOU Holland
had no personal recollection regarding
the matter either
according to Regan's aide Regan still
has no recollection of Mulholland ever
providing information regarding BCCI to
him in reviewing the CIA documents and
the testimony of coeur MO Holland and
bench it appears that the CIA has
accurately set forth the information
regarding first American provided
Mulholland Regan and bench in 1985 and
that Moe Holland bench and Regan's
memories that the CIA did not tell them
about BCCI's secret control of first
American are at best incorrect the 1986
and 1989 reports while the 1985 report
received oddly limited distribution the
1986 report containing most of the
the elements of the earlier report
including the fact that BCCI was owned
by first american was distributed more
widely to the Department of State
Defense Intelligence Agency National
Security Agency National Security
Council Commerce Department and to
Treasury thus every major CIA user that
might be interested in the information
received it except for the two agencies
which would have had a statutory
responsibility to begin investigations
in response the Federal Reserve and the
Justice Department however Treasury logs
again showed no actual receipt of the
document and there is no report of
Treasury having passed the information
to its agents in US Customs including
those in Tampa whose investigation of
BCCI led to its indictment on money
laundering charges in October 1988 the
1989 report which provided detailed
information concerning BCCI's
criminality was provided both customs
and the FBI and reiterated the
information reported in the 1985 and
1986 memos that first American was owned
by BCCI
even at this late date the Federal
Reserve was notified by no one of the
existence of the report or of any of the
material in it unofficial BCCI CIA links
the unofficial story of BCCI's links to
US intelligence is complicated by the
inability of investigators to determine
whether private persons affiliated with
US intelligence were undertaking actions
such as selling US arms to a foreign
government outside ordinary channels on
their own behalf or ostensibly under
sanction of a US government agency
policy or operation in the 1970s and
1980s there have been cases of people
with ties to US intelligence engaging in
operations on their own behalf
which in fact had no ties to any
approved US government interest such as
former CIA officer edwin wilson's
illegal arms sales
to Idi Amin of Uganda and to Colonel
Qadhafi of Libya there have been other
cases such as retired General Richard C
cords arms sales to Iran and to the
Contras in the iran-contra affair which
are hard to distinguish from Wilson's
case except for the fact that the sales
had actual secret approval and support
from officials within the government
although they were not authorized by law
under the arms Export Control Act and
although Congress did not receive
notifications required by law from the
president in the case of BCCI former CIA
officials including former CIA director
Richard Helms and the late William Casey
former and current foreign intelligence
officials including kamal adham and
abdul rauf Khalil and principal foreign
agents of the u.s. such as Adnan
Khashoggi and man who shared Corbin fr
float in and out of BCCI at critical
times in its history and participate
simultaneously in the making of key
episodes in u.s. foreign policy ranging
from the Camp David peace talks to the
arming of Iran and as part of the
iran-contra affair as early as the
mid-1980s sources in the United Kingdom
or alleging that BCCI was providing
services not only to the CIA but to
intelligence agencies of a number of
countries including the Soviet Union for
example a November 5th 1986 letter to
the governor of the Bank of England
written anonymously stated the following
quote the BCCI is involved in helping
people avoid tax illegal transfers of
money
hawala transfers off-the-record deposits
conduit for drug and crime money and
also as banker to intelligence agencies
for most major agencies of the world
end quote did BCCI its shareholders or
its officers perform services for the
United States government during any part
of its existence where such services
linked in any respect to BCCI's
activities such as its acquisition of
first American
the unofficial record explored below
raises these questions but cannot answer
them definitively Kamal Adham BCCI's
godfather of Middle East intelligence
Kamal Adham
who is the CIA's principal liaison for
the entire Middle East from the
mid-1960s through 1979 was the lead
frontman for BCCI and its takeover of
first American was an important nominee
shareholder and BCCI and remains one of
the key players in the entire BCCI
affair on July 29th 1992 he reached a
plea agreement with the District
Attorney of New York acknowledging that
he had been a BCCI frontman in the
United States and agreeing to provide
full cooperation with US law enforcement
in BCCI related investigations and
prosecutions Adam was at the time of
BCCI's creation in 1972 the
brother-in-law of King Faisal of Saudi
Arabia and the head of Saudi
intelligence responsible for internal
security and relations with external
intelligence agencies press accounts
concerning atom from the late 1970s
referred to him as the godfather of
Middle East intelligence emphasized the
closeness of his ties to the Central
Intelligence Agency and described his
having had responsibility for making
payments on behalf of the CIA to
Egyptian President Anwar Sadat when
Sadat was merely Nasser's vice president
and having financial troubles as Bob
Woodward described it quote relations
between the CIA and the Saudi
intelligence service were generally good
going back to the days when the
legendary and enormous ly wealthy Kamal
Adham
had been its head in 1970 the Saudis had
provided then Egyptian vice president
Sadat with a regular income it was
impossible to determine where Saudi
interests in these arrangements ended
and American CIA interests began end
quote Adams
historic relationship with US
intelligence was indeed unusually close
while Adam was still in place as the
CIA's liaison in 1977 the CIA's station
chief for Saudi Arabia Raymond H Clos
chose to go to work for Adam upon
leaving the CIA according to press
reports at the time which close has only
denied since the BCCI scandal broke as
Jeff girth of the New York Times
reported in 1981 quote in the case of
mr. close the one-time station chief in
Saudi Arabia former government officials
say his actions while in the CIA and
since retirement are often clouded in
mystery in the first place
some think mr. close may still be
working for the CIA in some capacity
although he officially retired in 1977
they add that a further complicating
factor is that some Saudis privately
share the same perception end quote
The Times account describes how close
had actually given approval to weapons
sales from Saudi Arabia to Pakistan in
the early 1970s and contravention of the
official policy enunciated by the
American ambassador and states that
close went into business with Kamal
Adham upon leaving the CIA within months
of going into business with close
Kamal Adham became the lead investor for
the CCA H Group taking over first
American officially on his own behalf
but in fact acting as a nominee for BCCI
on April 23rd 1981 Adam personally
appeared at the Federal Reserve's
hearing on the first American takeover
to inform the Federal Reserve of his
personal wealth and background and his
desire to be a passive investor in that
appearance
Adam neglected to tell the Federal
Reserve of his background in Saudi
Arabian intelligence historic ties to
the CIA or that Adam had acted as the
most important liaison between the
United States and his longtime friend
anwar sadat and helping negotiate the
Camp David Accords as President Carter's
former director of the Office of
Management and Budget Bert Lance
testified quote there was an opportunity
there for Kamal Adham
to have done the kind of work he did
with regard to Sadat's visit to
Jerusalem and that sort of thing and
subsequently playing a role in regards
to satisfying some of the Arab countries
with regard to the action that Sadat had
taken both in going to Jerusalem and
also in Camp David end quote
the key role played by Adam and Camp
David was apparently to encourage other
Arab political figures not to repudiate
Sadat for agreeing to peace with Israel
although such attempts may have appeared
unsuccessful in terms of public
statements by Gulf rulers it is clear
that many of the Gulf rulers in private
provided some support for Sadat
including then Crown Prince and now King
Fahd of Saudi Arabia who sought to
strengthen ties with the United States
as a means of defending the Saud family
from a variety of possible instabilities
the actual intent of BCCI and its Arab
shareholders and participating with BCCI
and the takeover of first American
remains a matter of speculation one
article appearing in The Washington Post
on December 18 1977 at the very
beginning of the takeover efforts
regarding first American and the
National Bank of Georgia described the
intent of BCCI and the Arabs as gaining
quote access to the administration end
quote
through Lance the involvement of Gulf
leaders in the takeover in Washington at
the same time as the Camp David Accords
were put into place would have been
recognized within the Middle East at the
time as an important symbolic gesture by
each of them to strengthen ties with
Israel's superpower sponsor the United
States their ownership of first American
also would have provided a direct means
to gain influence in the u.s. through
the ownership of the Bank to
recapitulate Adam
was at the same time in business with a
retired CIA station chief whose
activities caused people in the US and
Saudi governments to question whether he
was truly retired acting as an
intermediary for the US and negotiations
regarding Camp David and acting as a
phony lead shareholder in a takeover of
the largest bank in the nation's capital
on behalf of BCCI the simultaneous II
was thus either part of a larger
political plan of Adam BCCI and people
within the Carter Administration and the
CIA or merely a coincidence questioned
about the concurrence of these events
Adam has told us investigators that they
were unrelated and thus BCCI's purchase
of first American was not a quid pro quo
for Camp David
instead Adam has suggested that his
involvement in these events and BCCI's
later involvement in financing the
presidential library charities and
travel of President Jimmy Carter for
whom Camp David was the major
achievement of his presidency were in
fact coincidence Clark Clifford and
sworn interrogatories stated that he too
believed Adams roles in Camp David and
in the simultaneous takeover of
financial general work coincidence
Clifford stated that while Adam had told
him of his friendship with Sadat he had
not advised Clifford of having any role
in Camp David a fuller account of Adams
role as a front man for BCCI from its
creation and in connection with the CCA
H takeover is contained in the chapter
on BCCI's nominees Abdul Rauf Khalil
Abdul Rauf Khalil like Kamal Adham
was a BCCI shareholder and frontman from
its creation and a key nominee and
BCCI's secret takeover of first American
like Adam Khalil appeared at the Federal
Reserve on April 23rd 1981 to tell the
Federal Reserve he intended to
be a passive investor like Adam Khalil
failed to advise the Federal Reserve
that he was at the time of the Federal
Reserve's hearing a key figure in Saudi
Arabian intelligence and it's liaison to
the United States indeed Khalil's
description of his activities at the
hearing were fundamentally misleading on
this point as they presented Khalil to
be nothing more than a private Arab
businessman who has a friend of Adam
joined Adam to be passive investor of
Middle Eastern money in the stable US
banking system as Khalil told the
Federal Reserve quote my career has been
devoted to business and I presently hold
interests in real estate mechanical and
electrical maintenance projects and
commodities in addition and I have been
involved in some business ventures with
American and British manufacturers for
the installation of electronic and
computer equipment in Saudi Arabia
end quote Khalil did not characterize
the kind of electronics and computers he
was installing in Saudi Arabia or
advised the Federal Reserve of the
telling name of one of his businesses
the Saudi security and technical
services company in fact the electronic
and computer equipment which Khalil
referred to included the electronic and
computer equipment for the government of
Saudi Arabia and for its intelligence
operations Pricewaterhouse audit reports
suggest that Khalil had no written
contact with BCCI
from 1985 on by the late 1980s senior
officials of BCCI knew of no way to
contact Khalil and in some cases such as
that of chief financial officer masseur
Rahman even doubted his existence yet
throughout this period BCCI used Khalil
or his name extensively as a nominee and
transactions in Latin America and the
Caribbean as well as in Europe while
Khalil continued to have ongoing contact
with the CIA which continued according
to law enforcement officials until well
after BCCI's closure on July 5th 1991
moreover Khalil simultaneously was a
principal shareholder and director of
Capcom BCCI's commodities trading
affiliate throughout this period
Khalil's continuing ties to the CIA are
exemplified by the experience of US
regulators who asked the State
Department in 1991 to locate Khalil for
service of legal documents and we're
told that Khalil could not be located
after some months the regulator's
determined that Khalil was frequently
found in the offices of the CIA station
chief in Saudi Arabia upon making this
suggestion to the State Department the
regulator's found that service of the
legal documents on Khalil was quickly
arranged former CIA director Richard
Helms and BCCI frontman Mohammad Yovani
Adam and Khalil were not the only BCCI
and CCA h shareholders with intelligence
ties before Adam acted as the lead
shareholder and the takeover of first
American another person acted as BCCI's
chief frontman in an earlier
unsuccessful takeover attempt that man
mohammed rahim matagi Yovani was listed
in the original SEC filing in the early
1978 takeover attempt as a 5%
shareholder of CCA H head revani who was
at the time the principal partner of
former CIA director Richard Helms and
Helms's international consulting firm
Sofia and the chief financier of that
firm during the time it revani acted as
bcc i--'s lead frontman in the original
takeover he received advice on how to be
protected from any liability in that
role by Helms thus there were personal
legal and financial links between Helms
and iturra Boni at a critical time in
the history of BCCI's acquisition of
first American it revani founded the
Mellie industrial group in Iran in 1949
to manufacture Footwear and leather
goods and developed close ties to the
government of the
shah of iran by the time of the first
financial general Bancshares takeover in
1978 the Meli Industrial Group owned 23
operating companies as well as joint
ventures with foreign firms such as
Goodyear and United Chemical era revani
also owned the island industrial company
which held interests in the Iran Arab
bank and had a net worth estimated in
financial documents of over 50 million
dollars personally and a financial
empire whose corporate value was as much
as eight hundred million dollars era Von
Teese friendship and financial support
were critical to Helms in this period
Helms a 30-year veteran of the CIA and
its predecessor the OSS was dismissed in
February 1973 from his position as CIA
director by President Nixon and
appointed ambassador to Iran until 1977
where he met Vani when he returned to
the u.s. Helms was indicted for lying
before a congressional committee
concerning CIA activities in Chile on
October 31st 1977 Helms pled no contest
to two charges in return for a
recommendation by the government that he
not be sentenced to prison in arranging
this plea deal Helms was represented by
Washington defense attorney Edward
Bennett Williams but in addition to
Williams's negotiations Helms also
called upon clark clifford for help in
the fall of 1977 clifford visited a top
Justice Department official to argue
against an indictment of Helms saying
such charges could damage the US
intelligence community despite
Clifford's successful intervention with
justice as a result of the guilty plea
Helms was in the words of the federal
judge who presided over the case quote
in disgrace and shame
end quote it was precisely at this time
that inter Avani provided a critical
lifeline to Helms through financing the
Saffir company
for the Iranian word for ambassador as
an international consulting firm whose
initial business was mostly supplied by
air bonnie and devon 'is contacts
according to severe company corporate
records and other documents on file in
civil litigation in atlanta in the case
of g and h montage gmbh v Yovani
superior court of Gwinnett County
Georgia 88 - a - zero three five seven
one six eighty percent of Sofia was
capitalized and owned by inter Vani
moreover much of Sophia's early business
activity was handled by Bonnie's former
chief us assistant Roy Carlson who
became vice president of Saphir and had
close ties to BCCI
Carlson who served as a naval officer in
the Pacific during World War two joined
the US Foreign Service and was detailed
to South Africa before moving to the
Bank of America where he spent 20 years
while working for boa Carlson was
stationed in Tehran in the 1960s and in
Beirut in the early 1970s Carlson
ultimately became head of the bank's
operations throughout the Middle East
and East Africa during that time he came
into close contact with a beedi advising
IBD on the formation of BCCI in 1972
prior to BCCI's incorporation in
luxembourg in turn IBD
had introduced Carlson to inner bonny
one of the most successful
industrialists in Iran who hired him to
be manager of the Mellie group during
this period Carlson started his own
company the Northwest Investment Company
which was created in order to quote help
expedite shipments through Europe to
companies in Iran end quote
Northwest invested $120,000 into
sapphire company during its first year
and one year later liquidated this
investment in Saphir selling its shares
to an entity brockton leather company
which in turn sold them to Richard Helms
for $1 corporate records obtained from
Switzerland in May 1992 show that
Northwest is still listed as in
operation and that Carlson is listed as
vice-president of the company and as a
resident of Tehran although Carlson
lives in Snowville Georgia
Northwest corporate records also show
that dr. marko jack mehdi the lawyer for
northwest is a director of Rothschild
continuation Holdings a holding company
run by BCCI director dr. Alfred Hartmann
although it has not been able to
determine if they are related companies
the subcommittee has uncovered documents
indicating that BCCI shareholder Kamal
Adham
was president of a Panamanian holding
company called Northwest International
after the Iranian Revolution Carlson
fled Iran and went to work for Richard
Helms in Saphir on transactions financed
by air Avani
then after a guy's fire own purchased
National Bank of Georgia from Burt Lance
on behalf of BCCI
I got Hasan a beedi personally selected
Carlson as the new head of National Bank
of Georgia a memorandum prepared by BCCI
lawyers following a meeting with Carlson
in November 1990 describes how a nirvani
by early 1978 became a front man for
BCCI and its takeover a first American
at the very time era Vani was financing
Helms's international consulting firm
the memorandum described Carlson as
telling BCCI the following quote in the
mid-1970s and arising out of the
relationship which had grown from
Agha Hassan a beedis involvement with
air Avani over Iran Arab Bank
I got Hasan a bt had invited rahim inter
Boni to take a 5% stake in first
American Carlson said that I got Hasan a
bt wished the consortium holding the
shares to have a broad background
including those from Iran Carlson said
the material produced at trial purported
to indicate that Rahim
a nirvani had applied to credit and
commerce americas for a loan in order to
purchase the sheriff's take the
investment had not proceeded because
firstly Rahim inter Vani had never been
keen to make the investment at all but
have been persuaded that he could do so
on the basis of the loan to be made to
him by a B D and B CCI end quote
when intervene he agreed to act as a
frontman Richard Helms drafted legal
language to protect irani against
possible liability for the use of his
name as a shareholder by a BD BCCI and
the Clifford law firm a telex from Helms
two-hitter Vani dated October 20th 1978
describes Helms's assistance to era Vani
as follows quote Roy Carlsen asked on
October 19th that I have an independent
attorney review the seven documents he
sent me by telex you are not running
undue risks Carlson also told me that
you wanted a draft of a simple agreement
which would hold you harmless in these
arrangements the text of this agreement
is as follows Letter Agreement for value
received the undersigned jointly and
severally agreed to indemnify you from
any liability loss or damage including
reasonable attorneys fees arising out of
or caused by your granting as
shareholder or a director a power of
attorney to any partner of Clifford
glass McIlwain and Finney a Washington
DC law firm to act in your name with
respect to the transaction involving
financial general Bancshares of
Washington DC end quote the Telex ended
with the sign off with warmest regards
Helms with this suggestion Helms was
assisting in Urbani
and acting as a front man for BCCI who
would not be at risk for the use of his
name by the BCCI group represented by
Clark Clifford and Robert Altman Helms
was assisting in Urbani in his acting as
a BCCI frontman in the takeover being
handled by Clifford just one year after
Clifford had assisted Helms in his
negotiations with the Justice Department
on his perjury indictment Erev Annie's
role in the takeover was acknowledged
recently by his son Bama and revani
who told the Atlanta Constitution that
his father quote lent his name to the
1978 takeover bid at the request of BCCI
founder Agha Hasan a BD end quote
despite the existence of the October
1978 telex from him to it Urbani
regarding how to structure the hold
harmless agreement for era Bonnie to the
Clifford firm in the original FGB
takeover Helms has recently denied that
he was involved in the transaction
terming the allegation quote totally
untrue absolute nonsense end quote
it Ravana's rolled in bcc i--'s initial
attempt to acquire financial general
ended with the Iranian Revolution in
January 1979 as he became an unnecessary
nominee over the following decade hitter
Vani Carlson and Helms continued to
interact with one another and with BCCI
Helms provided introductions for hitter
Vani to then US ambassador to Germany
Walter J Stossel jr. in January 1979 and
through former senator Albert Gore
senior contacted senator bumpers office
for assisting on locating rice dealers
for era Bonney Helms and Yovani also
continued to refer business to one
another during the 1980s Helms continued
to introduce inter Bonnie to prominent
Americans writing Vice President Bush on
a Nirvana's behalf in october 29 1987
forwarding in october 16th 1991 letter
from inner bonnie to bush and forwarding
letters of congratulations from inner
bonnie to president-elect Bush and
Secretary of State James Baker on
November 28 1988 none of the actual
letters from hitter Vani to George Bush
discussed in the Helms in Urbani
correspondence have been located but the
cover letter from it revani to Helms on
the October 16
nineteen eighty seven letter refers to
inter Von Teese desire to provide Vice
President Bush with advice on his
presidential campaign Helms took other
steps on a table on his behalf including
introducing inter Bonnie's son Ellie -
ambassador Paul Nietzsche arms control
adviser to President Reagan and riding -
US ambassador to Egypt Frank Wisner on
Erev on his behalf on may 22nd 1989
Helms introduced inter Bonnie's son Ally
to former CIA station chief for Saudi
Arabia Raymond clothes who had
previously worked for Arab Anees
successor as BCCI's lead front men and
the first American takeover Kamal Adham
on July 11th 1989 throughout this period
BCCI financed it irani investments in
the United Kingdom and in the United
States which in 1989 amounted to 38
million dollars in a single transaction
to buy a New York office building 140
East 58th Street other BCCI documents
showed numerous loans typically of
millions of dollars at a time to the
inner Bonnie family as well as
indications that the IRA Bonnie's also
received substantial loans from the
National Bank of Georgia both while that
Bank was owned by BCCI through Gaither
own and afterfat our own was replaced as
a nominal owner by first American BCCI
and William Casey and his Network On
February 23rd 1992 NBC News broadcast to
the allegation that former director of
Central Intelligence William Casey met
secretly for three years with a BD that
such meetings took place every few
months at the Madison Hotel in
Washington DC and that they discussed
matters relating to u.s. arms deals to
Iran and the arming of Afghani rebels
prior to the broadcast
NBC contacted the CIA and was advised of
the following by the CIA quote an
extensive search of CIA files and cable
traffic revealed no evidence that CIA
was involved in
or had any knowledge of any use of BCCI
for the sale of arms to Iran or the
diversion of funds for the Nicaraguan
Contras in connection with the
iran-contra affair end quote
previously Kerr had testified before the
Subcommittee on October 25th 1991 that
quote allegations that the agency had
any direct or indirect relationship with
a beedi or recruited him for CIA
activities are absolutely baseless end
quote according to the CIA in February
1992 the CIA found quote no records or
evidence whatsoever to indicate that
former director KC or the agency had any
sort of a relationship with a BD end
quote balanced against these flat
denials our statements to the contrary
by one BCCI official in a position to no
two US officials the BCCI official
explicitly described meetings between KC
and IBD at the Madison Hotel in the
mid-1980s identified one other person
who had personal knowledge of the
meetings and provided an account which
one US official deemed credible in
addition there are statements by BCCI
officer Abdullah psyche ax and Bert
Lance that each had noticed in 1985 a
change in abhi T's attitudes towards the
United States which they attributed to
his developing relationship with the CIA
Sakia testified that in 1984 he was told
by a BD or one of his associates in
London that a BD was uncomfortable about
travelling in the United States because
he feared he was on a CIA watchlist
but that as of a year later beedie's
attitude had changed completely giving
Secchia an impression that quote a deal
had been struck somewhere end quote
Lance provided a more detailed account
describing a meeting with IBD at a
symposium on conflict resolution at
Emory University sponsored by President
Carter in October 1983 quote what a BT
was from the precise moment that Ronald
Reagan was sworn in as president of the
United States I have been on the CIA
watchlist and my every movement my every
act whatever I do personally as well as
through BCCI is noted watched observed
under surveillance of the Central
Intelligence Agency
I said well why mr. IBD and he said
something that was very interesting mr.
chairman he said you have to understand
that I fall into the category of being a
third world liberal end quote
according to Lance a BT's attitude and
concern about the CIA suddenly changed
significantly in 1984 where he had been
concerned about making visits to the
United States and about expanding his
operations in the United States he now
felt confident leading lance to conclude
that OBD had received quote an assurance
end quote that the US government would
no longer impede his activities Lance
acknowledging he had no hard evidence
for his assertion nevertheless concluded
that the CIA had made an effort quote to
co-opt mr. IBD and BCCI
and in effect turned them into the bank
of the CIA end quote
neither lance nor Sakia had been exposed
to the others testimony at the time of
making these statements or had ever met
one another one possible explanation of
the contradictory accounts is that Cayce
undertook actions in the foreign policy
or intelligence sphere while director of
the CIA outside its record-keeping and
operations
the CIA's legal department has described
such activity by Casey including any
role he had in the iran-contra affair as
being undertaken in his position as an
advisor to the president rather than in
his position as director of Central
Intelligence in such cases
Casey would have taken actions which
were outside the record keeping of the
CIA undocumented fully deniable and
effectively irretrievable a
Rainie and arms deals and dealers
regardless of whether a BT and CIA
director Casey concluded a deal under
which BCCI would provide off-the-books
assistance to any unofficial or
off-the-books operation of Casey VCC I
was in contestable used by key
iran-contra figures to finance arms
shipments to Iran in connection with the
secret Reagan administration initiative
CIA records as well as kurz testimony
state the CIA did not know this however
the record is clear that a number of
BCCI officials knew of the US government
arms sales to Iran at the time
ironically BCCI knew of this Reagan
administration initiative at a time when
the Iranian arms cells remain secret not
only from the US public but the Congress
and at a time when the CIA knew that
BCCI was a criminal enterprise BCCI was
also involved in a number of other
Iranian armed cells after the fall of
the Shah some of which appear not to
have been completed and others of which
appeared not to have involved the United
States and still other cases involving
BCCI's use for arms sales to Iran it is
simply not possible to determine the
extent of involvement by US officials
BCCI was used from the late 1970s in
London by Iranian arms brokers who
became the central figures in the
October Surprise allegations of secret
negotiations with Iran involving Cayce
and Iranians over the fate of US
hostages it was also used by Iranian
arms dealers in Britain who never
completed arms sales with Iran most
importantly it was extensively used by
Adnan Khashoggi and manager gorban afire
and arms deals that were directly on
behalf of the United States 1984 to 1986
Adnan Khashoggi and manager gorbunov are
both Saudi businessman Adnan Khashoggi
and Iranian arms merchant manager
Gabanna fire were central agents of the
United States and selling arms to Iran
in the iran-contra affair
according to the official chronologies
of the iran-contra committees khashoggi
acted as the middleman for five Iranian
arms deals for the United States
financing a number of them through BCCI
and Gorter bana fire was the individual
who conceptualized the arms for hostages
and provided the initial channel to the
Iranian moderates with whom the Reagan
administration negotiated prior to
delivering shipments of us tow missiles
and Hawks to Iran in 1985 and 1986
Khashoggi served as the banker for arms
shipments as the undercover scheme
developed in 1985 and 1986 Khashoggi
himself said he advanced 1 million
dollars in August 1985 to quote get the
deal going end quote
according to his own and other published
accounts he provided some 30 million
dollars in loans altogether depositing
money in a Swiss bank account controlled
by Lake resources the company run by
former White House aide Oliver North who
played the pivotal role in the operation
involving the arms sales and diversion
of funds to Nicaraguan Contras evel's
both Khashoggi and gore bono far banked
at BCCI's offices in Monte Carlo and for
both BCCI's services were essential as a
means of providing short-term credit for
sales of arms from the US through Israel
to Iran khashoggi x' use of BCCI for the
iranian armed cells was first described
in passing in an iran contra committee
deposition on june 8 1987 describing the
movement of 10 million dollars from
credit Swiss which would go through BCCI
four times to produce 40 million dollars
of sales and therefore additional profit
in the same deposition the witness
khashoggi business manager and manual
floor described corbin afar as stating
these are my associates and writing down
the name
BCCI floor described BCCI as acting not
merely as corbin afar and cash oh jeez
Bank for the purpose of these
transactions but as an actual partner in
the Iranian arms deals as described in
detailed subcommittee testimony by BCCI
Paris manager Nazir shenoy on March 18
khashoggi came to Paris to meet with
Shenoy in early 1986 to discuss
continuing transactions he had until
then been conducting through BCCI's
Monte Carlo branch
according to Shenoy the meeting was set
up when Shenoy wished to learn more
about the reasons for the sudden
increase in assets and activity of the
Monte Carlo branch of BCCI which was
under his jurisdiction as chief manager
for the French region of the bank he
learned from Munir Caterham the branch
manager for Monte Carlo that most of the
new assets and activity were the result
of a very successful relationship that
had been developed with Saudi arms
dealer at non Khashoggi yogi had two to
three very active deposit accounts at
Monte Carlo
according to Shenoy and kept very large
balances there paying his crew through
traveler's checks at the rate of 100,000
to 150,000 dollars each month shenoy
decided to learn more and met with
khashoggi and Kettering in BCCI's office
in Paris quote I met khashoggi in a
small room at the bank he told me he had
a deal he was to be a supplier by
American Arms through Israel and supply
them to the Iranians what he wanted was
a four day credit end quote
gosh yogi told shenoy he was working
directly for the US government and the
CIA and needed BCCI because none of the
parties involved in the iran-contra
affair trusted one another quote the
Israelis wanted their money for the arms
whereas the Iranians would only pay when
the arms physically would reach them the
Americans wanted their money as soon as
they
gave their arms to the Israelis and
Khashoggi did not have the money himself
at the time Khashoggi wanted a revolving
five million dollar credit and the
charges he was prepared to pay were
generous 2% front end fees per
transaction for two million dollars you
would get $40,000 per transaction then
you would get an interest at one and a
half percent over LIBOR for the actual
number of days the overdraft loan or
line of credit was operating this was
juicy end quote
in meeting Khashoggi Shenoy learned for
the first time that BCCI had been
providing these services for khashoggi
for a number of months through the monte
carlo office of BCCI without the
knowledge of the Paris office which was
responsible for the Monte Carlo office
Kareem explained that there had been at
least five transactions as of early 1986
that had never been detected by other
BCCI offices and which had never
received formal approval in writing by
BCCI's headquarters in London this was
done by exploiting BCCI's float through
bcc i--'s officer taking a check on a
Thursday or Friday from Khashoggi and
holding it over the weekend while giving
khashoggi credit for the check
immediately
gosh Oki in return would use the money
and make the payments to the Israelis
the arms would be delivered over the
weekend and by Monday or Tuesday
Khashoggi would have the check from a
Swiss bank normally Credit Suisse where
the North Sea Court Enterprise
maintained its accounts Credit Suisse
would give khashoggi a demand draft
which BCCI would then cash for its
credit on the transaction on a Tuesday
or Wednesday after khashoggi had his
funds from the Iranians
end quote according to shenoy the five
or more transactions had involved eight
to ten million dollars in all Shenoy
recognized that the activity was
profitable but he was uncomfortable
about BCCI being involved in a
transaction that secretly involved the
u.s. Israel and Iran in arms deals
and that had not been and would not be
approved in writing by bcc i--'s London
office
she noise said that he told khashoggi he
could not continue the deals that they
would have to stop them in the weeks
that followed Shenoy noticed that
profits at the monte carlo branch fell
indicating to him that his subordinate
had obeyed Shenoy order but he then
learned that the arms deals started up
again anyway and that Khashoggi and
Caterham completed two to three more
transactions out of Monte Carlo totaling
fifteen million to seventeen million
dollars in the same period
Genoa learned from Karim that Iranian
arms sales manager Urbano far also
maintained a regular deposit account at
BCCI Monte Carlo and amounts ranging
from two million to two point five
million dollars typically kept in
short-term certificates of deposit
shenoy suggested to Karim that BCCI
sever its relation with Gorman afar and
was told quote we should let the account
be he is in very good books with French
intelligence with the American
government he is helping everybody and
he has good accounts in Switzerland and
I hope we will get more money from him
end quote
according to Shenoy BCCI officers
understood that quarter bond afar had
helped the French government obtain the
release of hostages held in Beirut and
that accordingly BCCI would strengthen
its status in France by handling gorban
affairs business further confirmation
for shenoy account came from bcc i--'s
senior office in the united states abdur
Secchia who testified that in the mid
1987 he was contacted by FBI agents
investigating the iran-contra affair who
needed to obtain records from BCCI Monte
Carlo which was the missing link in
their documentary chain involving the US
and Credit Suisse
according to Sakia the FBI told him that
ABC CI branch manager and Monte Carlo
had been paid $100,000 quote presumably
by the US government
and quote and deposited that cheque in
Switzerland in his own account they
asked Tsuchiya to obtain BCCI's records
concerning the transaction from Europe
Sakia contacted his superiors in London
and they discussed whether or not BCCI
should provide the information to the
FBI despite the fact that to do so would
violate French secrecy laws the official
at BCCI London a mere Siddiqui agreed
with Sakia that if BCCI's involvement in
iran-contra became known it would focus
dangerous attention on the bank's other
activities BCCI London informed Sakia
that if the United States government
agreed to prevent BCCI's involvement
from becoming public BCCI would violate
French law and provide the records to
the United States the FBI agreed to this
arrangement and the records regarding
the Iranian transactions were provided
by BCCI
to the FBI following this agreement
Sakia
remained concerned about the fact that
the BCCI official involved mynheer karim
had accepted a $100,000 bribe to handle
the transactions and deposited them in a
non BCCI institution and yet had not
been disciplined by BCCI
based on this and related information
Sakia concluded that the handling of the
arms sales by BCCI quote was all being
orchestrated from London and London was
aware of what was happening end quote
according to the iran-contra deposition
of Albert Hakim banker for the North Sea
Court Enterprise khashoggi made deposits
in the North Sea court accounts from
BCCI
in the amount of 2.5 million dollars On
February 7th 1986 2.5 million dollars On
February 10th 1986 and two checks of
five million dollars each On February 18
1986 still additional deposits were made
from BCCI by khashoggi for five million
dollars on May 18th
1886 provocatively Hakeem referred to
additional transactions amounting to
millions more involving an entity
referred to simply as I see of the grand
Caymans reminiscent of BCCI's own grand
Caymans affiliate I see I see three
payments to BCCI from the North Sea
Court accounts including Lake Resources
the account used to finance arms to the
Contras are shown in the ledger books
maintained by Hakim on behalf of the
enterprise amounting to ten million
dollars only in addition the Hakim
Ledger's show five wire transfers
amounting to three hundred forty six
thousand dollars to first American Bank
which may merely indicate that Secord
North or the fourth partner of the
enterprise former CIA agent Thomas
Klein's may have had an account there
evidence for the involvement of BCCI
headquarters in London and a beedi in
the iran-contra arms transactions is
contained in documents between BCCI
grand Caymans and BCCI London in March
1986 involving a ten million dollar arms
transaction the exact amount referred to
by a manual floor as having been
intended for movement through BCCI by
Khashoggi and gorban afar and tracking
the February 18 1986 payments referred
to by Hakim the documents which refer to
the use of a front company quote in
formation end quote
to handle the transaction are in the
nature of preliminary discussions
regarding whether BCCI would handle the
transaction but they contain a critical
fact they demonstrate the involvement of
BCCI London in transactions involving
BCCI Monte Carlo and BCCI grand Caymans
from shenoy point of view the meaning of
the documents is that when he expressed
concern about the Khashoggi transaction
London simply went around him from
tsuchiya's the documents showed that a
BD had approved the BCCI project from
the beginning
ironically Clark Clifford had his own
long-standing ties to Khashoggi in 1981
khashoggi took $250,000 from Northrop
intended for Saudi Arabian Air Force
general Hashim M Hashim four years later
Northrop released documents accusing
Khashoggi of demanding the bribe for the
general and then converting it to his
own use Khashoggi retained clifford to
represent him in the subsequent federal
grand jury investigation of the matter
significantly both kamal adham
and faisal alpha lies BCCI's front men
for the 1981 takeover or investigated as
well as Khashoggi for taking money from
Northrop and lockheed in connection with
u.s. arms sales to Saudi Arabia perhaps
as a matter of coincidence the business
formed by Secord in May 1983 immediately
upon his retirement from the US
government in partnership with Hakim
Stanford technology trading group
international of Vienna Virginia used a
BCCI shareholder as its local agent in
Saudi Arabia for contracts to provide
security services in the Middle East the
person who Secord hired to help him
acquire Saudi government contracts was
Abdullah Saeed mugshot and his brothers
together the Bhushan brothers owned
about one-half of one percent of BCCI
during the period they represented
Secord
and Hakim in Saudi Arabia while
representing Secord they had also
deposits in BCCI ranging from 13 million
dollars to 21 million dollars in BCCI
and had outstanding loans of about 6
million dollars from BCCI other Iranian
arms dealers and BCCI Ben Banerjee a
recurring question about the iran-contra
scandal is the issue of whether there
may have been earlier arms sales to Iran
prior to the period covered by the
iran-contra congressional committees on
September 29 1987 developed a German
newspaper report
that in 1984 iran's ambassador
authorized the purchase of 20,000 US
made tow missiles after talks between us
lieutenant colonel oliver north and
Iranian officials in Hamburg
according to developed the deal fell
through and the weapons were never
delivered after an Iranian contact
disappeared with the letter of credit
according to developed Iran's ambassador
to West Germany Mohammad Javad Solari
signed a letter authorizing the purchase
of the anti-tank weapons worth 264
million dollars and north then a member
of the US National Security Council took
part in one negotiating session on
November 20th 1984 the newspaper said
the purchase authorization came after
talks in a Hamburg hotel between
Iranians and two British based arms
dealers Michael J Aspen owner of the
weapons dealership Delta investments and
indian-born millionaire weapons dealer
Ben Banerjee chief of the British
company B R and W enterprises both
Bonanno G and North denied the
allegation documents obtained by the
subcommittee filed in a British criminal
case later brought against Aspen for
fraud in connection with the attempted
sale of the American tow missiles to
Iran in 1984 and a second attempted sale
in 1985 include a pro-forma invoice
dated November 21st 1985 for the supply
and delivery of 1,250 units of B cm 71 a
tow missiles manufactured in the USA
quote all brand new in manufacturer's
original packaging end quote
from B R and W Industries Limited signed
by Ben Ben RG u.s. denominated lift
trucks for the purpose of Bank and
customs documentation and handled by
BCCI in London the invoice was
accompanied by telexes and letters on
BCCI stationery of a nature and type
ordinarily used by BCCI showing BCCI
providing counter guarantee
and letters of credit for a transaction
involving the lift trucks in November
and December 1985 involving the Iranian
government and its Bank Bank
Meli and channeled through the Arabian
Gate general trading company of Dubai
United Arab Emirates in staff interviews
BCCI Paris manager Shenoy confirmed that
Banerjee banked with BCCI in London and
was involved in quote large dealings
with Iran end quote
during the Aspen trial Lesley Aspen
Michael Aspen's brother testified that
the tow missile sale was a legitimate
sale authorized by the United States
government as part of a 1984-1985 effort
to ransom CIA agent William Buckley with
the weapons to be transferred from
Portugal to Iran in a sworn statement of
May 1st 1987 Aspen attested that he and
Oliver North opened three joint accounts
in BCCI Paris into which North deposited
five million dollars on November 15 1984
and listed the account numbers and
signature cards of the three accounts
one of which was maintained for an
entity called Devon Island allegedly
under the signature of North and
Banerjee and the other two accounts
which were numbered accounts maintained
under the signatures of Aspen Bonacci
and Corbin afar the subcommittee has
confirmed the existence of accounts in
London involving Banerjee and in Monte
Carlo involving Gawain afar but has not
received access to BCCI's accounts in
Paris to determine whether or not the
accounts referred to by Aspen existed
North has denied having maintained such
an account however
BCCI Paris manager shenoy did learn of
an account in the name Devon Island when
he received a telephone call in 1988
from a London office of BCCI asking
about it and was advised by his
assistant that the account existed but
had not been used both Banerjee and
Aspen are dead
the subcommittee is continuing to seek
banaji and Aspen's records from bcc
i--'s Liquidators in hopes of
determining whether the arm cells to
Iran in which they participated had the
backing of or involvement of any US
official 1980 BCCI and October Surprise
Syrus hash Amy de Leite Syrus Hashimi
an Iranian expatriate living in London
is a key figure in the October Surprise
allegations charging that William Casey
and other members of President Reagan's
election team in 1980 engaged in
negotiations with Iran whereby Iran
would delay the return of US hostages
held in Iran until after the November
1980 election in return for the u.s.
providing Iran with needed arms for its
war against Iraq according to these
allegations which are substantially
based on statements made by Hashem E's
brother Jamshid who was based in Paris
in this period cyrus Hashimi was to have
acted as the middleman in these secret
negotiations between Casey and Iran
later Hashemi was indicted by the US
Attorney for the Southern District of
New York for weapons dealings with Iran
in a case that was ultimately thrown out
of court as a result of complications
arising out of the iran-contra affair
without reaching any judgments
concerning these allegations records
obtained by the subcommittee demonstrate
that BCCI was one of the principal banks
used by cyrus Hashimi
in the United Kingdom Bruce Rappaport
Alfred Hartman and BCCI Bruce Rappaport
an Israeli born Swiss businessman who
was investigated in 1987 by independent
counsel Robert Mackay
for certain activities he engaged in on
behalf of former CIA director Casey had
several connections to important
participants in the BCCI affair for
example he placed one of BCCI's key
renta faces
Alfred Hartmann who headed BCCI's
secretly held Swiss affiliate monk de
cames at Pressman
on the board of directors of his inter
maritime bank of Geneva and New York
developed a relationship with bcc i--'s
original contact in the u.s. Bert Lance
in the mid-1980s and purchased an
Antigua and melon farm from Israeli arms
dealers who were significant customers
of BCCI in Miami Rappaport's links to
BCCI are significant chiefly because of
his relationship to Cayce a frequent
golfing partner for example Rappaport
threw a party in Washington in the
summer of 1985 for Casey to demonstrate
high-level support for a project to
build a pipeline to ship oil from Iraq
through Jordan Rappaport was also the
person who allegedly controlled accounts
which received 10 million dollars for
the Contras provided the North Sea Court
operation by the Sultan of Brunei at the
request of Elliott Abrams the
iran-contra committees were told by
Swiss authorities that the ten million
dollars had disappeared and was found to
have mistakenly gone to an unwitting
Swiss businessman who then returned the
money after the iran-contra affair was
discovered press accounts which
Rappaport has denied contend that the
businessman was Rappaport if Rappaport
did indeed receive the funds the
placement of the ten million dollars
with him would not likely have been an
error given his close relationship with
Casey Oman while reviewing the complex
relationships between BCCI and the Bank
of Oman which was affiliated with BCCI
the subcommittee came across several
linkages suggesting ties between the
Sultanate of Oman key figures and Saudi
intelligence and US persons with
connections to the intelligence
community as a 1985 article in The New
York Times noted Western intelligence
has been a major influence in this tiny
but strategically placed Gulf state
adjacent to the United Arab Emirates
headed by Sheikh azide
although BCCI is not men
in the article there is a substantial
amount of evidence which demonstrates
that both BCCI and the CIA have played a
major role in the foreign policy and
economic affairs of that country the
article discusses a pasadena corporation
tetra Tech operated by a former CIA
agent which quote helps manage several
key Amani government agencies end quote
it is clear that several companies and
government agencies in Oman had
multi-million dollar loans from BCCI
BCCI's loan book dated March 3rd 1991
for example shows Oman aviation service
had an eight million dollar loan
Oman building and contracting company
had over eleven million dollars Oman
flour mills company at a thirteen
million dollar loan Oman Development
Bank had thirteen million dollars Oman
investment and finance company had a ten
million dollar loan Oman building and
contracting services had a sixteen
million dollar loan and Sultanate of
Oman had fourteen million dollars in
loans these are of course only the
companies or government agencies which
are clearly identifiable as having an
Oman connection there are undoubtedly
other companies which the subcommittee
has been unable to identify
besides the entities listed above BCCI
may have been moving money through the
National Bank of Oman to fund the war in
Afghanistan British journalists have
written quote BCCI's role in assisting
the u.s. to fund the Mujahideen
guerrillas fighting the Soviet
occupation is drawing increasing
attention the bank's role began to
surface in the mid-1980s when stories
appeared in The New York Times showing
how American security operatives used
Oman as a staging post for Arab funds
this was confirmed in the Wall Street
Journal of 23rd of October 1991 which
quotes a member of the late general
Xia's cabinet as saying it was Arab
money that was pouring through BCCI
the bank which carried the money on from
Oman to Pakistan and into Afghanistan
was National Bank of Oman where BCCI
owned 29% end quote the National Bank of
Oman and its CEO case zihua we also did
business with Bruce Rappaport Jerry
Townsend the president of colonial
shipping in Atlanta told the
subcommittee that his former employer
Bruce Rappaport had business relations
in Oman with case zihua we at the
National Bank of Oman Townsend who
claims to have worked as a Soviet
analyst with the CIA was employed by
Rappaport between 1981 and 1990 Townsend
recalled the Rappaport flew Zubin Mehta
and the London Philharmonic to Oman on
one occasion to entertain the Sultan and
other members of the royal family more
importantly according to Townsend
Rappaport and zihua we had numerous
quote contracts with the Saudis
end quote they consolidated loan report
for BCCI of March 3rd 1991 shows a loan
authorization of almost 11 million
dollars to these awawa group with an
outstanding balance of nearly 8 million
dollars conclusions key questions about
the relationship between US intelligence
and BCCI
cannot be answered at this time and may
never be answered without the ability
for investigators to review BCCI records
and interview BCCI witnesses held by the
government of Abu Dhabi other questions
could be answered from documents
available in the United Kingdom and
subpoenaed by the committee but for the
decision by the British judge on an
application of BCCI's Liquidators not to
permit the committee to receive them
without the written permission of the
depositors involved such as Abu Nidal
and the deceased bin Ben RG and Cyrus
Hashimi still other BCCI documents in
the United Kingdom have been segregated
and sealed by British intelligence mi5
and withheld from dissemination to
anyone finally other relevant
information in the possession of the CIA
concerning certain important figures in
BCCI's history remains classified and
hence outside the scope of this report
summaries of some of this classified
material have been provided to staff in
a classified form that cannot be
referred to however even there the
underlying material upon which these
summaries were based has been withheld
and therefore any additional relevant
information the underlying material may
contain can only be a matter of
speculation however even by its own
account of its activities the CIA made
two significant mistakes in its handling
of BCCI
first the CIA failed to provide the
critical information it had gathered to
the correct users of the information the
Federal Reserve and the Justice
Department cur testified that he was
quote not sure it was a bad decision
end quote a judgment challenged
immediately during the hearing by
Senator Hank Brown who noted quote my
training was that somebody's supposed to
take responsibility and when a decision
is made that is a bad decision you
identify who made it
you may feel a failure to get
information about a criminal activity to
the Federal Reserve is not a bad
judgment I have a different view of it
end quote
second even when the CIA knew that BCCI
was as an institution a fundamentally
corrupt criminal enterprise it used both
BCCI and first American BCCI's secretly
held u.s. subsidiary for CIA operations
in the latter case some first American
officials actually knew of this use
while the reporting concerning BCCI by
the CIA was in some respects impressive
especially in its assembling of the
essentials of BCCI's criminality it's
secret purchase of first American by
1985 and its extensive involvement in
money laundering there were also
remarkable
gaps in the cia's reported knowledge
about BCCI according to Kerr the CIA did
not have any information regarding the
involvement of Kamal Adham its chief
intelligence liaison in the Arab Middle
East during the 1960's and 1970's in
BCCI or that of his successor Abdul Rauf
Khalil or of iran-contra arms dealer
Adnan Khashoggi those statements have
since been reiterated to the
subcommittee by the CIA in April 1992
following a further review of CIA
records with the caveat by the CIA that
CIA record-keeping is not consolidated
and that it remains possible that
information which exists has not been
retrievable the professed lack of
knowledge by the CIA about the
activities of its foreign intelligence
liaisons and operatives who were BCCI's
major shareholders and customers is
perplexing and disturbing the
relationships between the BCCI and Adam
and Khalil were according to public
accounts among the most important
intelligence relationships the United
States has had in Saudi Arabia over a
quarter of a century
similarly Khashoggi and gorbunov are
performed a central role for the u.s.
government in connection with the
iran-contra affair and operations that
involved the direct participation of CIA
personnel the CIA's professions of total
ignorance about their respective roles
in BCCI
are out of character with the agency's
detailed knowledge of many critical
aspects of the bank's operations
structure personnel and history if one
accepts these statements at face value
it is hard not to conclude that the
CIA's ignorance on these matters
constituted a significant intelligence
failure on the part of the CIA
given the CIA's responsibilities to
protect the u.s. against covert action
by foreign powers it would be especially
disturbing if the United States does not
as a general matter
anything whatsoever as the CIA has
testified here of very substantial
financial activities within the United
States of chief foreign intelligence
liaisons such as Adam and Khalil the
errors made by the CIA in connection
with its handling of BCCI were
complicated by its handling of this
congressional investigation initial
information that was provided by the CIA
was untrue later information that was
provided was incomplete and the agency
resisted providing a full account of its
knowledge of BCCI until almost a year
after the initial requests for the
information these experiences suggest
caution in concluding that the
information provided to date is full and
complete caution is especially warranted
given the CIA's recurrent statements
that its record-keeping has not been
consolidated and that it is possible
that records pertaining to BCCI
or its shareholders could have been
missed in its search the lack of
recollection by the chief intelligence
officer of the Treasury Douglas
Mulholland and by a then senior official
of the Office of the Comptroller of the
currency
Robert Bench of the CIA having told them
about BCCI's secret ownership of first
American is troubling according to the
CIA's records Mulholland recognized at
the time that the information was
important and sought more information
the original memoranda are written in a
fashion that makes it unlikely that any
recipient would not have noted BCCI's
secret ownership of Washington's largest
bank holding company and have remembered
it later accordingly the testimony of
both bench and Mulholland raises
questions about their candor